entries/2024/new-hypermedia-systems.md, before:

---
title: Building the new Hypermedia Systems
---

A shiny new edition of <cite>Hypermedia Systems</cite> is out! Apart from incorporating typo and grammar fixes sent in by readers, the book was completely redesigned inside with new a layout. To achieve a much higher fidelity of design, we ported the book to Typst --- the hot new LaTeX replacement.


## Why change what works?

The first print release of HS was written in AsciiDoc. It seems like a natural choice as it did back then -- after all, many publishing houses trust AsciiDoc for their books. What we learned the hard way is that what those publishers also have are teams of engineers developing proprietary tooling to produce their final output. AsciiDoc doesn't actually have a way to produce good print output:

 - `asciidoctor-pdf` uses a PDF library usually used for generating reports, and the output is just about readable, but not good -- and you don't have any good tools to change that.
 - the venerable Pandoc can output AsciiDoc, but oddly can't read it -- so we can't compile our book to LaTeX.

Your best option for producing a printable PDF, if you care at all about typesetting, is to compile to HTML, and print that to PDF. `asciidoctor-web-pdf` is a tool that wraps this workflow in a usable package, combined with Paged.js to polyfill the many features of CSS for print media that browsers don't support. This is how we produced the first edition of HS, and it was a pain for multiple reasons.

 - Paged.js has bugs. One bug that was nasty to work around was one where using any CSS to modify the page numbers (say, resetting them after the front matter) would cause all the pages to revert to 0. I don't know if this was fixed.
 - HTML with Paged.js is slow. The book has a little over 300 pages, and each page has a perceptible delay as it gets laid out. Even worse, I had to manually scroll all the way to the bottom of the book before printing, or the back half of the book would be blank. Afterwards, printing would take what felt like a solid minute, though I never measured how long -- since presumably nobody at Firefox thought printing a page to PDF would be anything but instant, there's no progress bar or any other indicator of success beyond the PDF being where it's supposed to be.
 - The idiosyncrasies of this process meant that it only really worked on my machine, and I had to send PDFs back and forth with my co-authors and editor. The PDFs were absolutely massive and exceeded the Discord upload limit, so I uploaded each one to Google Drive and shared a link. 
 - Paged.js has more bugs -- asides would refuse to break across pages while code blocks were all to eager to create widows and orphans -- or disappear completely -- which I had to work around in a whack-a-mole fashion.
 - AsciiDoc has facilities for indexing, but doesn't support outputting them in HTML in any way. Worse, the mechanism I could have used to do it myself was deprecated _and removed_ before the replacement was implemented. Our editor ended up creating an index _by hand_, which was appended to the PDF.
 - You go through all this effort only to be rewarded with very mediocre typesetting, since browsers use greedy algorithms for laying out text for performance reasons, yielding far worse line breaking compared to the dynamic programming algorithms of TeX.

Despite all this, we somehow produced a usable PDF. Most readers report being satisfied with the book's design (Amazon's failure to print a PDF consistently notwithstanding). The code that generated this PDF is not open source --- initially, it was because we thought it might eat into print sales, but these days the real reason for me is that it might help someone else that tries to do this, and nobody should try to do this.

If you have any "why didn't you just" recommendations, feel free to post them in the comments on link aggregators, they might help someone else, but don't send them directly to me. I assure you, I've evaluated all options available even if I didn't mention them here.

Speaking of link aggregators,


## Typst

I first stumbled upon Typst when the author's [thesis][] was posted on [the red site][]. Enthralled by its combination of quality typesetting, lightweight markup and an ergonomic scripting language tightly integrated, I knew that if I was ever part of another book project, I would use Typst.

I rewrote my [CV](https://cloud.dz4k.dev/s/fqfLSo4FKibzp64) in it, as well as some documentation for an old project. This only confirmed my initial impression -- Typst is a joy to use, and the scripting language is so good I wish it was a programming language in its own right.

But I couldn't use Typst for Hypermedia Systems, because Typst didn't support HTML output. Imagine my excitement when a while ago, I realized Pandoc had added Typst support!


## Porting the manuscript

As I mentioned before, Pandoc can't read AsciiDoc. So how can I convert the 104537 words of HS into Typst? I was ready to do it by hand, but I decided to try something else first.

One of AsciiDoc's primary output formats is DocBook XML. I don't know what it is or who uses it, but Pandoc can read it! I converted the book to DocBook XML, and then to Typst. Except AsciiDoc was buggy and generated invalid XML, so I had to fix that first. And then massage the resulting Typst a bit more. And apply any future changes to the AsciiDoc source to the Typst version.

Still better than waiting for the PDF to render, though.


## The code blocks

AsciiDoc has a unique style of code blocks where you can place markers in the code that refer to explanatory notes below the block -- it looks like this:

```asciidoc
[source,python]
----
print("Hello, world!") <1>
----
<1> The canonical first program in any language.
```

If you've read HS, now you know how we did those. Typst doesn't have any such feature, so with the great help of the Typst Discord community, I reimplemented it in about 50 lines of [utterly cursed Typst code][code-callouts.typ].

![A code block with callouts in the new book](/assets/photos/typst-callouts.png)

### code-callouts.typ: a Hypermedia Systems experience

Begin by defining a _label_, which we will use to mark code blocks we have already annotated. This is to prevent an infinite loop that occurs when we use this function in a `show` rule.

```typst
#let processed-label = <TypstCodeCallout-was-processed>
```

The function `code-with-callouts` takes a code block and a function to render callouts. A simple default implementation returns the annotation number in square brackets in grayed-out sans-serif font.

```typst
#let code-with-callouts(
  it /*: content(raw) */,
  callout-display: default-callout /*: (str) => content */
) /*: content */ = { ... }
```

Begin by checking if the code block has already been processed. 

```typst
) /*: content */ = {
  if it.at("label", default: none) == processed-label {
    it
  } else { ... }
}
```

The dance with `it.at("label", default: none)` is a way to access the code block's label without throwing an error if it has none. If it doesn't have this label, the real fun begins.

```
let (callouts, text: new-text) = parse-callouts(it.text)
```

`parse-callouts` is a function that extracts the callouts from the code block. We pass it the `text` of the code block -- the plain, un-highlighted code as a string. It returns that text with the callout markers removed, and the callouts themselves in the form of an array of callout numbers for each line. This is in a way the meat of the whole operation, but it's also pretty mundane string processing code, so I won't dwell on it.

```typst
#let callout-pat = regex("<(\\d+)>(\\n|$)")

#let parse-callouts(
  code-text /*: str */
) /*: (callouts: array(array(int)), text: str) */ = {
  let callouts /*: array(array(int)) */ = ()
  let new-text = ""
  for text-line in code-text.split("\n") {
    let match = text-line.match(callout-pat)
    if match != none {
      callouts.push((int(match.captures.at(0)),))
      new-text += text-line.slice(0, match.start)
    } else {
      callouts.push(())
      new-text += text-line
    }
    new-text += "\n"
  }
  (callouts: callouts, text: new-text)
}
```

Now that we have the callouts, we can render them. We do this by abusing show rules. A `raw.line` (object representing a line of raw text) knows its line number, so we can use that to look up the callouts for that line. We then iterate over the callouts and render them with the provided `callout-display` function.

```typst
show raw.line: it => {
  it
  let callouts-of-line = callouts.at(it.number - 1, default: ())
  for callout in callouts-of-line {
    callout-display(callout)
  }
}
```

You might assume as I did that this would be the end of it and we could just return the code block, but there's a catch. The code block still has the `<1>` markers in it, and we need to remove them. To do this, we create a new code block with the same attributes as the original, but with our `new-text` as the body. The fact that we create a brand new code block instead of returning the one we were given is what causes the infinite loop I mentioned earlier, so we apply the processed label.

```typst
let fields = it.fields()
let _ = fields.remove("text")
let _ = fields.remove("lines")
let _ = fields.remove("theme")
[#raw(..fields, new-text)#processed-label]
```

This is the code that powers the code blocks in the new edition of Hypermedia Systems. All you need to do is add a `show raw.where(block: true): code-with-callouts` to your Typst document, and you can have code blocks with callouts too!

The actual text of the callouts is just a list written below the code block. If I was implementing this from scratch, I might have had the `code-with-callouts` accept the content of the callouts as well and match them up to the code by text labels, but AsciiDoc uses numbers and makes you match them up manually, so I did too.


## The index

Typst has no indexing functionality by default, but its scripting and introspection capabilities are powerful enough to implement indexing at the library level. In fact, an indexing library already exists in the form of [in-dexter][], which is small enough that I made a [modified version][indexing.typ] of it to have full control over the index's appearance and to add support for hierarchical terms.

![The index of the new book](/assets/photos/typst-index.png)


## The web book

Typst can produce a wonderful PDF for us, but we also need to publish the book online. The previous web book was built with the static site generator [Lume][] with an AsciiDoc plugin I wrote. For the new book, I wanted to test out [Müteferrika][], an online book publishing toolkit I'm building. The advantage of Müteferrika is that it understands the structure of a book (parts, chapters, frontmatter etc.). The disadvantage is that it was and still is an unfinished mess, so I had to fix a lot of bugs to get it to work for HS. To build the web book, I had to convert the Typst source to HTML, which I planned to do with Pandoc. Unfortunately, Pandoc doesn't have full parity with the mainline Typst compiler, and spat out many errors when I tried to convert the book. The fix for most of these was to replace direct property accesses with `at` calls and add null checks as needed.

The web book is now live at [hypermedia.systems](https://hypermedia.systems). It has (as far as we could tell) everything the old web book had, and more. There's a button at the bottom of each page where you can customize the colors of the website to your liking. For the print version, we're switching from Amazon KDP to Lulu, which will hopefully result in more consistent printing.

- [Read the new Hypermedia Systems online](https://hypermedia.systems/book/contents)
- [Buy the paperback on Lulu](TODO)
- [Get the EPUB for your e-reader](TODO)
- [Buy the Kindle release on Amazon](TODO)


[thesis]: https://laurmaedje.github.io/programmable-markup-language-for-typesetting.pdf
[the red site]: https://lobste.rs/s/zd8b6p/typst_programmable_markup_language_for
[code-callouts.typ]: TODO
[in-dexter]: https://typst.app/universe/package/in-dexter
[indexing.typ]: TODO
[Lume]: https://lume.land

Commit message:

How to set the background color of a table cell

entries/2024/new-hypermedia-systems.md, after:

---
title: Building the new Hypermedia Systems
---

A shiny new edition of <cite>Hypermedia Systems</cite> is out! Apart from incorporating typo and grammar fixes sent in by readers, the book was completely redesigned inside with new a layout. To achieve a much higher fidelity of design, we ported the book to Typst --- the hot new LaTeX replacement.


## Why change what works?

The first print release of HS was written in AsciiDoc. It seems like a natural choice as it did back then -- after all, many publishing houses trust AsciiDoc for their books. What we learned the hard way is that what those publishers also have are teams of engineers developing proprietary tooling to produce their final output. AsciiDoc doesn't actually have a way to produce good print output:

 - `asciidoctor-pdf` uses a PDF library usually used for generating reports, and the output is just about readable, but not good -- and you don't have any good tools to change that.
 - the venerable Pandoc can output AsciiDoc, but oddly can't read it -- so we can't compile our book to LaTeX.

Your best option for producing a printable PDF, if you care at all about typesetting, is to compile to HTML, and print that to PDF. `asciidoctor-web-pdf` is a tool that wraps this workflow in a usable package, combined with Paged.js to polyfill the many features of CSS for print media that browsers don't support. This is how we produced the first edition of HS, and it was a pain for multiple reasons.

 - Paged.js has bugs. One bug that was nasty to work around was one where using any CSS to modify the page numbers (say, resetting them after the front matter) would cause all the pages to revert to 0. I don't know if this was fixed.
 - HTML with Paged.js is slow. The book has a little over 300 pages, and each page has a perceptible delay as it gets laid out. Even worse, I had to manually scroll all the way to the bottom of the book before printing, or the back half of the book would be blank. Afterwards, printing would take what felt like a solid minute, though I never measured how long -- since presumably nobody at Firefox thought printing a page to PDF would be anything but instant, there's no progress bar or any other indicator of success beyond the PDF being where it's supposed to be.
 - The idiosyncrasies of this process meant that it only really worked on my machine, and I had to send PDFs back and forth with my co-authors and editor. The PDFs were absolutely massive and exceeded the Discord upload limit, so I uploaded each one to Google Drive and shared a link. 
 - Paged.js has more bugs -- asides would refuse to break across pages while code blocks were all to eager to create widows and orphans -- or disappear completely -- which I had to work around in a whack-a-mole fashion.
 - [How to set the background color of a table cell](https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctor/wiki/How-to-set-the-background-color-of-a-table-cell)
 - AsciiDoc has facilities for indexing, but doesn't support outputting them in HTML in any way. Worse, the mechanism I could have used to do it myself was deprecated _and removed_ before the replacement was implemented. Our editor ended up creating an index _by hand_, which was appended to the PDF.
 - You go through all this effort only to be rewarded with very mediocre typesetting, since browsers use greedy algorithms for laying out text for performance reasons, yielding far worse line breaking compared to the dynamic programming algorithms of TeX.

Despite all this, we somehow produced a usable PDF. Most readers report being satisfied with the book's design (Amazon's failure to print a PDF consistently notwithstanding). The code that generated this PDF is not open source --- initially, it was because we thought it might eat into print sales, but these days the real reason for me is that it might help someone else that tries to do this, and nobody should try to do this.

If you have any "why didn't you just" recommendations, feel free to post them in the comments on link aggregators, they might help someone else, but don't send them directly to me. I assure you, I've evaluated all options available even if I didn't mention them here.

Speaking of link aggregators,


## Typst

I first stumbled upon Typst when the author's [thesis][] was posted on [the red site][]. Enthralled by its combination of quality typesetting, lightweight markup and an ergonomic scripting language tightly integrated, I knew that if I was ever part of another book project, I would use Typst.

I rewrote my [CV](https://cloud.dz4k.dev/s/fqfLSo4FKibzp64) in it, as well as some documentation for an old project. This only confirmed my initial impression -- Typst is a joy to use, and the scripting language is so good I wish it was a programming language in its own right.

But I couldn't use Typst for Hypermedia Systems, because Typst didn't support HTML output. Imagine my excitement when a while ago, I realized Pandoc had added Typst support!


## Porting the manuscript

As I mentioned before, Pandoc can't read AsciiDoc. So how can I convert the 104537 words of HS into Typst? I was ready to do it by hand, but I decided to try something else first.

One of AsciiDoc's primary output formats is DocBook XML. I don't know what it is or who uses it, but Pandoc can read it! I converted the book to DocBook XML, and then to Typst. Except AsciiDoc was buggy and generated invalid XML, so I had to fix that first. And then massage the resulting Typst a bit more. And apply any future changes to the AsciiDoc source to the Typst version.

Still better than waiting for the PDF to render, though.


## The code blocks

AsciiDoc has a unique style of code blocks where you can place markers in the code that refer to explanatory notes below the block -- it looks like this:

```asciidoc
[source,python]
----
print("Hello, world!") <1>
----
<1> The canonical first program in any language.
```

If you've read HS, now you know how we did those. Typst doesn't have any such feature, so with the great help of the Typst Discord community, I reimplemented it in about 50 lines of [utterly cursed Typst code][code-callouts.typ].

![A code block with callouts in the new book](/assets/photos/typst-callouts.png)

### code-callouts.typ: a Hypermedia Systems experience

Begin by defining a _label_, which we will use to mark code blocks we have already annotated. This is to prevent an infinite loop that occurs when we use this function in a `show` rule.

```typst
#let processed-label = <TypstCodeCallout-was-processed>
```

The function `code-with-callouts` takes a code block and a function to render callouts. A simple default implementation returns the annotation number in square brackets in grayed-out sans-serif font.

```typst
#let code-with-callouts(
  it /*: content(raw) */,
  callout-display: default-callout /*: (str) => content */
) /*: content */ = { ... }
```

Begin by checking if the code block has already been processed. 

```typst
) /*: content */ = {
  if it.at("label", default: none) == processed-label {
    it
  } else { ... }
}
```

The dance with `it.at("label", default: none)` is a way to access the code block's label without throwing an error if it has none. If it doesn't have this label, the real fun begins.

```
let (callouts, text: new-text) = parse-callouts(it.text)
```

`parse-callouts` is a function that extracts the callouts from the code block. We pass it the `text` of the code block -- the plain, un-highlighted code as a string. It returns that text with the callout markers removed, and the callouts themselves in the form of an array of callout numbers for each line. This is in a way the meat of the whole operation, but it's also pretty mundane string processing code, so I won't dwell on it.

```typst
#let callout-pat = regex("<(\\d+)>(\\n|$)")

#let parse-callouts(
  code-text /*: str */
) /*: (callouts: array(array(int)), text: str) */ = {
  let callouts /*: array(array(int)) */ = ()
  let new-text = ""
  for text-line in code-text.split("\n") {
    let match = text-line.match(callout-pat)
    if match != none {
      callouts.push((int(match.captures.at(0)),))
      new-text += text-line.slice(0, match.start)
    } else {
      callouts.push(())
      new-text += text-line
    }
    new-text += "\n"
  }
  (callouts: callouts, text: new-text)
}
```

Now that we have the callouts, we can render them. We do this by abusing show rules. A `raw.line` (object representing a line of raw text) knows its line number, so we can use that to look up the callouts for that line. We then iterate over the callouts and render them with the provided `callout-display` function.

```typst
show raw.line: it => {
  it
  let callouts-of-line = callouts.at(it.number - 1, default: ())
  for callout in callouts-of-line {
    callout-display(callout)
  }
}
```

You might assume as I did that this would be the end of it and we could just return the code block, but there's a catch. The code block still has the `<1>` markers in it, and we need to remove them. To do this, we create a new code block with the same attributes as the original, but with our `new-text` as the body. The fact that we create a brand new code block instead of returning the one we were given is what causes the infinite loop I mentioned earlier, so we apply the processed label.

```typst
let fields = it.fields()
let _ = fields.remove("text")
let _ = fields.remove("lines")
let _ = fields.remove("theme")
[#raw(..fields, new-text)#processed-label]
```

This is the code that powers the code blocks in the new edition of Hypermedia Systems. All you need to do is add a `show raw.where(block: true): code-with-callouts` to your Typst document, and you can have code blocks with callouts too!

The actual text of the callouts is just a list written below the code block. If I was implementing this from scratch, I might have had the `code-with-callouts` accept the content of the callouts as well and match them up to the code by text labels, but AsciiDoc uses numbers and makes you match them up manually, so I did too.


## The index

Typst has no indexing functionality by default, but its scripting and introspection capabilities are powerful enough to implement indexing at the library level. In fact, an indexing library already exists in the form of [in-dexter][], which is small enough that I made a [modified version][indexing.typ] of it to have full control over the index's appearance and to add support for hierarchical terms.

![The index of the new book](/assets/photos/typst-index.png)


## The web book

Typst can produce a wonderful PDF for us, but we also need to publish the book online. The previous web book was built with the static site generator [Lume][] with an AsciiDoc plugin I wrote. For the new book, I wanted to test out [Müteferrika][], an online book publishing toolkit I'm building. The advantage of Müteferrika is that it understands the structure of a book (parts, chapters, frontmatter etc.). The disadvantage is that it was and still is an unfinished mess, so I had to fix a lot of bugs to get it to work for HS. To build the web book, I had to convert the Typst source to HTML, which I planned to do with Pandoc. Unfortunately, Pandoc doesn't have full parity with the mainline Typst compiler, and spat out many errors when I tried to convert the book. The fix for most of these was to replace direct property accesses with `at` calls and add null checks as needed.

The web book is now live at [hypermedia.systems](https://hypermedia.systems). It has (as far as we could tell) everything the old web book had, and more. There's a button at the bottom of each page where you can customize the colors of the website to your liking. For the print version, we're switching from Amazon KDP to Lulu, which will hopefully result in more consistent printing.

- [Read the new Hypermedia Systems online](https://hypermedia.systems/book/contents)
- [Buy the paperback on Lulu](TODO)
- [Get the EPUB for your e-reader](TODO)
- [Buy the Kindle release on Amazon](TODO)


[thesis]: https://laurmaedje.github.io/programmable-markup-language-for-typesetting.pdf
[the red site]: https://lobste.rs/s/zd8b6p/typst_programmable_markup_language_for
[code-callouts.typ]: TODO
[in-dexter]: https://typst.app/universe/package/in-dexter
[indexing.typ]: TODO
[Lume]: https://lume.land
